Thank you very much.
My name is Scott Adler.
I'm the Java Classes tech lead,
and welcome to the
Java State of the Union.
So this year,
We're excited that we have
more Java than ever before.
I mean, this is more than any other year.
So what do I mean by that?
We have more releases in the
past year than ever before.
If you just look,
this is a sample of some of
the releases we've put out.
This is more than we've ever
done in one year before,
and we'll get into detail later on this.
We've had, of 1.4.2,
which is our most recent release,
we've had over 2 million
downloads of this.
And this is not what's
bundled on machines.
This is people who've gone out and
downloaded it through software update
or actually gone to our ADC site.
So this means that people
actually have the latest version
of Java on their machine.
We also have more
features than ever before.
These are just a selection
of some of the features that
we've added in the past year.
Some of the key ones are Java3D and JAI.
We have new features in Xcode
that you might have seen at
the Xcode session earlier,
and we have some new
APIs we want to talk about.
And we have more compatibility
than ever before.
Now, this is really important because the
key to Java is that you can write once,
run anywhere,
or that's the promise of Java.
And we're trying to make run anywhere
as true as possible on Mac OS X.
We also have support for legacy applets,
and we'll talk more about that.
And we have a lot of Mac OS X features,
so not just compatibility
across platforms,
but compatibility between applications
on the Mac and Java applications,
and of course, enterprise applications.
And we have more performance
than ever before.
We now are taking advantage
of these 64-bit CPUs for you.
We also are taking advantage of the GPU.
You've seen a lot of that
in the keynote this morning,
and we'll talk in some detail about that.
And then we have
performance-tuned releases.
And what I mean by that is that
we're taking each of our releases,
we're looking at our
performance bottlenecks,
and we're solving those bottlenecks so
that we can move on to new bottlenecks.
So, as I like to tell everyone else,
that was the marketing presentation.
Now I'm going to take off the
whole marketing hat and I'm going
to talk a little bit more in depth
about what's really going on here
because I'm not a marketing person,
I'm a tech lead.
So, let's look at that.
So, more releases.
What are we talking about here?
We showed these releases before
and one of the keys here is
that we had JAI and Java3D.
Last year we released Panther,
which had both 1.3.1 and 1.4 in it.
And then February of this year,
we released Java 1.4.2 and that
was a milestone for us because
we're up to date with what Sun has
actually released at that point.
So, that was a good time for us.
We're actually up to date with Sun and
we're still up to date with them.
So, now you're here at the Developers
Conference and if you are on
ADC looking at the Java downloads,
we've actually shipped developer
previews of our work on 1.4.2.
We've been working hard on
1.4.2 on making it better.
Today you got your preview of Tiger,
and tonight you'll also be able to
download an Enterprise preview of One5,
and we'll talk about what that means.
Now before we dive into 1.5,
we're going to be releasing
a final release of 1.4.
That's in the future.
I'm not going to say exactly when,
but that's in the future.
We're hopefully going to get
lots of feedback from you of our
developer preview and then roll
that feedback into it and put out
our final release of 1.4.2 update 1.
But this update is actually
a very significant update.
We've been working on
a lot of new features,
and I want to show a little bit
about some of the performance
gains we've had in 1.4.2.
So with that,
I'd like to bring up Caroline to
show a demo of 1.4.2 update 1.
So this demo is just a quick preview
of some of the performance improvements
that we've made in 1.4.2 Update 1.
We're going to talk a lot more
in detail about the graphics
performance improvements on Friday at
the Java 2D/3D graphics session,
so you should all stick around for that.
But if you'd bring up the PC, please.
So you can see here the Java 2D demo
running on a dual Xeon 2.8 GHz PC.
And this is running under 1.4.2.
You've all probably seen
the Java 2D demo before.
It's a standard demo that Sun ships
with the JDK and that Apple ships
with the developer examples.
So the important point to notice
is that the performance readout
is around 100 frames per second.
All right, so now if we skip to demo two,
you can see what this looks like—oh no,
wrong one.
You can see what this—ah,
wrong one again.
Demo 2?
Yeah, this is the other machine, please.
So I need to set this up to onscreen,
because that's where we've
made our improvements.
So, you can see the Java 2D demo
running on 1.4.2 update 1 has about
twice the performance of a PC.
And this is a dual 2 gigahertz
machine running 1.4.2 update 1.
And you can see this for yourself
if you get the developer preview 3,
which is now available on the ADC site.
So with that, I'll hand it back to Scott.
Thank you.
So there was a lot of work going
on here in our graphic state
management and removing a lot of
bottlenecks to get this performance.
So we can go back to the slides.
So if we go back to the timeline,
1.4.2 Update 1 is going to be a
major release for us in terms of
performance and compatibility.
But if we go forward into the future,
the future of Mac OS X is Mac OS X Tiger.
Now,
there's also another release coming out,
Java 1.5,
which has also been codenamed Tiger.
So we just like to play on this,
and we'll just call it Tiger on Tiger.
So Java 1.5,
we're going to release a version
that will run on your Tiger seed.
So let's talk a little bit
about Java 1.5 for Mac OS X.
I know a lot of you are
eagerly anticipating this.
So this is Sun's biggest change to Java.
We're releasing a developer preview,
and it's targeted towards
non-GUI applications.
That's enterprise applications,
web objects, and JBoss,
those kinds of applications.
It includes all the source
changes from Beta 52.
Our final release of this,
when we do release the final version,
we're going to be taking all of the
1.4.2.1 improvements that you saw
here and we're rolling that into 1.5.
So you can count on all those
speed improvements being in 1.5
when we do the final release.
So these are just a bunch of
the One5 language features.
You probably know about these if you've
been following Sun's developments.
There are a lot of good ones.
Generics is what people
have been clamoring for,
enums and static imports.
You can learn more about these at the
Maximizing the Virtual Machine talk.
And you can also go to the
website and read all about them.
And there are a bunch of new
framework features in One5.
These are just some highlights.
And the first two we like to
highlight because they're things
we innovated on here at Apple.
Classes sharing we've
had for a long time.
And the OpenGL 2D pipeline is
something we innovated in One3.
And Sun has rolled into One5.
And there's a bunch of
other features that will,
again,
be talked about on Tuesday's session.
So now our Mac OS X Tiger,
what's important in here
for Java developers?
The important thing in
here is Quartz Extreme.
This is one of the most important things.
The Quartz Extreme that's going
to be in Tiger on the correct
configurations is going to be able to
accelerate all of your Java 2D drawing.
This is very similar to the
stuff we've done in the past,
but it's going to be on the OS level,
so all your Quartz
drawing will be sped up.
We also have new enhanced tech support.
There's going to be system-wide
performance improvements,
which again will lead us to
detecting what other things might
be bottlenecks and fix those.
And of course,
all of our 1.4.2 update one
work that's being shipped on
Panther will be moved into Tiger.
And of course, there's a lot more.
I'm not going to get into all those.
So back to features.
When we talk about more features,
one of the big places where we
always are adding features is
inside of Safari and applet support.
So what we're trying to be
is tightly integrated with
Safari as tightly as we can be.
So the big thing that we
released that everyone's been
asking for is live connect.
We have live connect support now,
with Safari and with Java 1.4.2.
So all those legacy applications
with live connect support that
people were complaining about before,
now work just fine.
So we've delivered that in the past year.
We're really happy that now you can
actually use your live connect things.
It's an older technology,
and we don't recommend
people use it all the time,
but if you have applications that use it,
you can run it.
And also security,
we actually store all of our
cookies with Safari's cookies.
We share cookies with them,
and we use the key chain to
actually store our certificates.
So some other new features we have.
We've got Java 3D and
Java Advanced Imaging.
Now, these are two key technologies from
Sun that we licensed from them,
and we've released in December.
And you can get them as a free download.
They're going to be bundled with Tiger.
And you can just download
Java 3D directly from our website,
NJAI.
And Java 3D is really a
high-level scene description API.
It's different from OpenGL and some
of the other things you might know of.
It's for high-level scenes,
so if you just want
to describe the scene,
let it take care of all the
descriptions underneath.
Java Advanced Imaging is sort of an
image manipulation API that's similar
to the kinds of things you can do
in Photoshop and similar to some
of the stuff we do in Core Image.
So you can do large-scale
image manipulation using JAI,
and it's all cross-platform.
This has been implemented
on the other platforms.
So you can write something in
JAI and Java 3D and bring it to
other platforms or take your app from
those platforms and bring it back.
So one of the key examples of this is
and some of the tools used on the
Mars Exploration Rover mission.
And so we're lucky enough to have
two of the engineers from the
Mars Exploration Rover mission here,
Jeff Norris and Mark Powell.
I'd like to bring them up
to show you a little demo.
Thank you, Scott.
Good evening.
We're here to talk a
little bit about Maestro,
which is the science operations tool
for the Mars Exploration Rover mission,
written entirely in Java and brought
to the Macintosh platform with the
help of the Java team at Apple.
This tool is the tool we use to analyze
data that's received from the rover,
Spirit and Opportunity,
each day in a scientific framework
and then build a high-level activity
plan for the rovers to execute on
the next Sol or Martian day on Mars.
It's also a public engagement tool that
we've distributed to the general public,
and all of you,
and some of you may have already done it,
can download Maestro
onto your own computers,
onto your own Macintoshes,
and use it to follow along with
the progress of the mission.
We'll switch to demo computer number one.
This is one of the mini-updates
we've released for Maestro,
which steps users through
the progress of the mission.
They come back and download
data updates from Maestro,
which kind of bring them up to
date with what's been going on.
So we'll start this first update.
You can hear a little bit from
our mission control as we were
coming in for landing on Spirit.
I guess we're not going to hear that.
What the software has allowed
us to do is to reach out to the
public in a fundamentally new way
because this is an actual mission
operations tool for the first time
released to the general public.
Now, it was developed primarily for the
mission operations workstations that we
have at the Mission Operations Center at
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
Okay, this is going to be really loud.
cheering very loudly at the
successful arrival of Spirit on Mars.
What I was saying was this has
allowed us to reach out to people
because it's the real thing.
It's giving them a hands-on
experience with the tool.
We developed this tool
for the Linux workstations
and mission operations,
but the Macintosh platform is an
important one to us for two reasons.
First, our primary user community,
which are the scientists on the mission,
use Macintoshes in their daily
work for a lot of other purposes,
and they wanted to bring this tool
onto their primary computers along
with their other applications.
And also, since we are distributing this
tool as an educational tool,
the Macintosh platform is critical
for the educational market.
So when it was time, well, actually,
right after we launched
these rovers to Mars,
we were thrilled to learn that
Apple had released support for
Java 3D and Java Advanced Imaging
and literally called up these
folks at Apple and shipped them
the binaries of our application.
And we got an email back a couple
weeks later saying it works great.
It didn't have to change anything,
which was really a great
relief to us because,
believe me, we had other things to be
worried about right then.
But literally,
we were able to turn right around
to our customers and to the
public and say this application,
which was developed for Linux,
primarily for operations,
is now available to you all on Macintosh.
It really made us look good,
so we certainly
appreciate that from them.
Now I'm going to step through a few
of the features of this application
just so you can kind of get a feeling
for how we use it in operations.
I'm going to do this from the point of
view of a scientist who's using the tool
to understand the Martian environment
and plan for another salt on Mars.
So.
What you're looking at here is
what a scientist might use in order
to just get his bearings on Mars.
This is the cylindrical projection
of images taken by the vehicle.
Now, we have a mast on top that takes
pictures in different directions.
And what we're using here is
Java Advanced Imaging to stitch
these images together in real
time using a component developed
at JPL called Jade Display,
something else which is
freely available to anyone.
We also use these Java Advanced Imaging
technologies to render other
projections of this imaging.
of this image,
and Mark's going to talk about that.
So here I'm going to bring up what
we call an azimuthal mosaic view.
This is kind of an overhead image
that gives you on one page the
entire vista of possibilities that
a scientist might want to explore.
We might start by saying where our
rover is currently here and if we're
going to drive five meters today,
do we want to travel in this
direction to the northwest or
this direction to the northeast?
And as Jeff was saying,
we are rendering all these mosaics
in the fly from the source images.
This is 20 images being composited
together into this mosaic.
And Java Advanced Imaging is a
very powerful tool for doing this.
We've downlinked upwards of 35,000 images
now from both of our rovers on Mars,
Spirit, and Opportunity.
And the scientists have used this
tool in its mission form to view
every one of those images for quality
control and scientific investigation.
And when they really want to get
an immersive sense of where the
rover is and what it's doing,
we also have this 3D view
which is enabled by Java 3D.
It really lets you get down through
the rover's point of view and
take a look at the Martian data.
on terrain, up close and personal,
from any vantage point that you want.
We're also taking advantage of some of
the advanced features in the Java 1.4 VM,
including NIO buffers,
which is what has enabled us to
load what is a very large data set
right in front of you right there.
I mean, we didn't have that preloaded,
so we can load these data
sets in just a few seconds,
really kind of blowing away all of
our hopes in terms of performance.
The other things that we use this
tool for is actually constructing
plans for the spacecraft to operate
on the following sol on Mars.
So what we're going to show you
now is how a scientist might use
Maestro to plan a basic arm sequence,
a sequence that uses the rover arm.
So what Mark's doing right
now is he's building a target.
It's a named position on Mars,
and our scientists and engineers
on this mission use Maestro to
name every single location that's
stored on the Martian surface.
So if you hear about us
talking about a rock called
the Pot of Gold quite recently,
it's this tool that
they're using to name it.
What you're looking at
now is a simulation,
a basic plan that's using the
rover to plan a basic arm sequence.
So what we're going to show you now
is a simulation of the rover's arm,
and as Mark clicks
through this simulation,
you see Maestro kind of giving
you a peek into the future of what
the rover's going to accomplish
if the plan that's currently on,
as it's been built right now,
is left that way and
sent to the spacecraft.
This is a valuable simulation tool
I thought we'd finish up
with a few pretty pictures,
and you've probably been wondering
why you had these red-blue glasses,
and you came in the door.
So if you put them on with
the red side on your left,
then you will not get a headache,
and see what we're actually
trying to show you.
We'll load a couple now,
and they'll show some more at the end.
But what you're looking at here
is the view we had coming out,
the rear camera from the Spirit Rover,
right after we drove
off for the first time,
in Gusev Crater to begin exploring Mars.
I can't tell you how excited we
were to see that looking back.
We didn't stay here very long.
We drove far away from the spot,
but this is the first view
we had to confirm that we
had safely left the lander.
I think the next thing we might show,
what do we got next here?
This is going to be Bonneville Crater,
a place we got to after about
two months of driving on Mars.
We've driven a lot further now.
We've driven now upwards of two
and a half kilometers—sorry,
three and a half kilometers—on
Mars since the beginning of the mission,
much further than we
ever expected to drive.
So Mark's going to scroll us across,
and as you're scrolling over here,
you can see right here,
that little white dot there is
actually the heat shield of the lander.
So as we were coming in on Mars,
the heat shield separates
from the spacecraft,
hit the ground and rolled for a long way,
and we found it again
while we were driving.
Amazingly enough,
we found the heat shields
for both of the rovers.
It's amazing how something that we made
sticks out on this very alien landscape.
So that's something we brought with us.
So I think we'll be showing
some more pretty pictures later,
but I'm going to wrap it up with that.
Thank the Java team and Apple again,
and hand it back over to Scott.
Thank you.
So can we go back to slides?
So that's really exciting.
We were glad that we were able
to work with JPL on getting this
all working on the Macintosh and
that all of our Macintosh users
can run Maestro and try it out.
We also love the fact
that in Mission Control,
they had a bunch of PowerBooks there.
That's kind of fun.
Oh, and this is in case the
demo crashed or something.
You can see the pretty pictures.
So let's talk a little bit more here.
When we're talking about features,
Xcode has a lot of new features for Java.
We've heard you, we know you want better
indexing in Java—that's in 1.5.
Better code sense—actually
working code sense for Java,
which is a new feature in 1.5.
And we have some new things with
Ant and JUnit and new J2EE support.
So check out these other sessions that
will talk more in depth about this.
So Shark,
I don't know how many people out
there know—who knows what is Shark?
Oh, that's good.
Okay, so the next slide,
you can read the beginning,
you know what Shark is.
Shark is a profiling tool
that we use here internally.
And the biggest point is that, for you,
is that Shark now
supports Java profiling.
So not only can you
profile your native stuff,
you can profile your Java stuff.
So please download, take a look at Shark,
try it out.
There are a couple demos that
will be done at the maximizing
the Java virtual machine.
So this is Rendezvous.
I don't know how many of you actually
know details about Rendezvous,
but Rendezvous is basically
a way to discover devices
without any configuration.
So what we're announcing today is that
we have Rendezvous for Java support,
which means we've wrapped
all the APIs for you.
You don't have to do any native code.
You can get directly to that
open source implementation
just using your 100% Java code.
So this is great if you're trying
to connect to set-top boxes or
printers or something like that.
And this will actually be
bundled into our Tiger release,
so you can count on it there.
You can download it now.
So let's go back to compatibility,
because compatibility
is a key point for us.
If we're not compatible,
you won't port your
applications to the Mac.
So write once, run anywhere.
This is the promise of Java.
A lot of people know that it's
more difficult than just that.
But what we're doing to try to solve
it is we're shipping up-to-date
Java with every single box that you buy.
So when you go out and you buy a Mac,
it's got Java installed on it.
It's not like other platforms where
you have to download it or you have
to go hunt for it or some other
people like HP are now bundling
Java on theirs because they know
it's a good idea to have it there.
People want their applets just to work.
So what does this mean for enterprise?
In enterprise,
we bundle Mac OS X Server with
all of our hardware,
and we also include with that JBoss,
Apache, Tomcat, WebObjects.
So your enterprise applications
will work right out of the box
with the software you have.
You don't have to go
out and buy anything.
You can just run it right there.
And there's a lot of information in this
session on JBoss about these details,
about how to get your WAR files and other
things running on your J2EE servers.
So, Micro Edition.
Micro Edition is an interesting
thing because obviously we don't have
any devices that run Micro Edition,
but you can use the Mac to
develop for Micro Edition.
You can build your midlets
right on the Mac in Xcode.
You can run a simulator right on the Mac,
and you can try it out,
and then you can download
it right to your phone.
So, to show this, I'd like to bring up
Ted Jucevic to show us a demo.
So, you know, this really isn't, um...
What I'm really trying to show
here is actually using Xcode to
do AMP builds and stuff like that.
But by itself,
That can only go so far for excitement.
So what we're going to do
here is actually show using
and David Koehn,
and the rest of the team will
be joined by Ted Jucevic,
who will be
and other members of the team.
And what I'm going to do over here
is actually just go ahead and build
and deploy this to an emulator.
I actually have over
here X11 up and running.
Should just go ahead and build
and launch up the emulator.
This emulator I actually got
from Mike Powers' website,
mpowers.net.
You can download it and we're actually
going to be showing a template.
in 318 on Wednesday morning.
So that's pretty exciting.
You've got your mid-light up and running.
If any debug stuff comes out,
it goes back to the terminal.
But let's actually just go in here,
change something,
so that it's obvious it's not just a
canned movie or something like that.
And asteroids in Xcode,
let's go ahead and just
change this back to zone.
Z-O-N-E, if I can spell correctly.
And let's go ahead and
relaunch that and rerun it.
And you can see it's not a canned thing.
Now, that's great.
You get it up and running on the
computer and stuff like that.
But the real world is where
things actually happen.
So let's go ahead and just go ahead
and deploy this to the cell phone.
We have over here, let's see,
Cocoa component.
And with any luck,
we should have the cell phone over there.
And expand it out so it looks a
little bit more like a cell phone.
Let's go ahead and push this jar over.
With MidP 1.0...
You don't have to use the JAD file if
you're just deploying the JAR file,
as long as you don't have any properties
in the JAD file that it needs.
So we're pushing it over.
It says, do you want to accept it?
Let me go ahead and say yes.
Push it over.
and with any luck it
should install and save.
And then let's go ahead and run it.
So it's pretty easy to do
Java deployment to phones from Mac OS X.
And if you come to my
session Wednesday morning,
3:18, you'll actually see and we'll
be demoing a template that will
be available after the session.
So thank you very much.
"So that shows you can easily develop
stuff for your phones right on the Mac.
You don't actually have to
go out and install another
emulator or something like that.
It's just right there for you."
"Finder running application."
So now let's talk about desktop Java,
because we spend a lot of time
on desktop Java making this a
smooth experience for people.
[Transcript missing]
So let's back up again and
talk about desktop Java.
And applets is one of the
biggest use of desktop Java.
It's games.
It's stock tickers.
It's almost anything you
can find in an applet.
And so we've been working
hard on web compatibility.
We added a bunch of things into 142
Update 1 that address multithreaded
event processing on applets.
We also have fixed hundreds
of very specific applet bugs.
You filed bugs saying this specific
applet doesn't work right on the Macs.
We fixed those.
Plus, we also updated our whole
drawing architecture to handle
the old style 1.1 drawing.
Now, if you know old style 1.1 applets,
they do a lot of things that are
not really recommended today,
like grabbing graphics from a second
thread and just pounding on them
instead of calling repaint and updating.
So we're handling those
cases much more smoothly now.
And so that actually means thousands
of legacy applets that might have
had little quirky problems no longer
have those problems because we now
are much more compatible when it
comes to multithreaded drawing.
And also we have Web Start,
which is a great way to keep
compatible applications so that you
can download full-fledged desktop
applications from your browser.
And you can have things like
custom JNI code inside of those
Web Start applications and have
different JNI code for different
platforms if you need any
platform-specific stuff in Web Start.
Now, application compatibility.
One of the big things we've done for
compatibility in Tiger specifically is
that we're going to ship 1.3 with Tiger.
Now, the important thing is you
should migrate off of 1.3 now.
And the reason for this is
that we're going to be removing
1.3 from a future OS release.
I'll repeat that again.
We're going to be removing
1.3 from a future OS release.
So if you're dependent on 1.3 and
you have a bug that's stopping you
from migrating from 1.3 to 1.4,
you need to get us that bug
immediately because if it's
something that we have to fix,
we need to address it right away.
So it's very important that,
as at all possible,
you can move off of 1.3 onto 1.4 because
1.4 and 1.5 are the future of Java.
So let's talk about 142 Update 1,
what we have for compatibility.
We've talked a little bit about this.
Multi-threaded painting is really
important for legacy applications,
and this means being able to just
slam a graphics object from lots of
different threads at the same time.
We now can handle that really well.
We also manage our own
context and surfaces separate
from the Cocoa framework,
so we're able to not have to worry
about when Cocoa does some drawing,
we know what our current state is.
And that's one of the ways we got that
great performance in the first demo
you saw of the ball spinning around.
And, of course,
the repaint mechanism compatibility.
So we're now actually much
more compatible to all
the legacy applications.
So the other thing that
we've done is we have lots of
Mac OS X enhancements to Java.
And these are enhancements that are
optional things you can do to try
to be a better Mac OS X citizen.
And these aren't things
you're required to do,
but most Mac OS X users are pretty savvy.
And if your application doesn't
look—if they don't find the
Quit menu where they expect it,
if they don't find the Preferences
menu where they expect it,
they're going to think that
you're not a good programmer.
They're not going to think, oh,
that's fine.
They're going to want it to
look just like everything else,
where it's consistency.
So one of the things we have
is we have accessibility.
So in accessibility,
what you can do with this is you can
support the Java accessibility APIs,
and then our accessibility frameworks
that are built into the OS will just
use those Java accessibility APIs.
So things like the screen reader for the
spoken user interface will just work as
long as you support Java accessibility.
We've done all the work to get that
middle layer so it all works together.
It also lets you do things
like scriptable applications.
So you can actually support
your buttons being scripted
for button presses and things.
So things like the automator
application could work with your
application if you have it scriptable.
The other thing is that
we've made Aqua everywhere.
Now you've probably seen this before,
but we just want to mention again, AWT,
since it's using Cocoa,
has all the Aqua look and feel.
Swing, we have the Aqua look and feel,
and we've put a lot of effort
into the Aqua look and feel to
make it look just like native.
We actually use native rendering
for the swing Aqua look and feel.
So your swing lightweight components are
actually using the very same rendering
path as the Cocoa heavyweight components.
So everything looks exactly the same.
Obviously, the swing components
are a lot more flexible,
but when you have a swing application
and you use the swing Aqua look and feel,
users should not be able to tell
the difference between a native
application and your Java application.
We also have support for things
like brush metal windows and moving
the menu bar out of the window
and up into the screen menu bar
where Mac OS X users expect it.
And then the bundling of applications.
This we've been doing for a long time,
but it's worth repeating.
We allow you to easily bundle your
application from jar bundlers,
our application to let you do this.
And it takes your jar files,
all your other support files,
and puts it into an application bundle.
So you can have just one
double clickable application.
You don't have to have a jar file with
an associated file of a bunch of images
or whatever you might have on other
platforms with a batch file to run it.
I mean, that's crazy.
So we just want you to bundle everything
into one application because users just
want a double clickable application.
They don't want a folder
filled with stuff.
And, of course,
we have native extensions.
So one of the things you can do on
every platform is you can use JNI and
you can get directly to native.
So if there's something we
haven't bundled already for you,
you can write your own JNI layer
and then use native code to get
right to any of our native services.
So if there's something you saw
in the tiger demo that you really
like and you see APIs for it,
you can go write your own JNI library
for that and then just use JNI to
call those in and provide a very
thin glue layer between those two.
And now to show you a little bit
about all these different things,
I'd like to bring up Matt Drance.
Thanks, Scott.
I just can't stay off the stage.
Forgive me.
So, I think we've already seen
commercials for Friday's talk
and for Wednesday's talk.
And so,
I'm here to give you a little preview of
what we'll be talking about on Thursday.
Like Scott said,
we've got a lot of native
additions and simple things.
Some that you get for free,
some that you don't,
but are still as easy
as free to implement.
So, what I've got here is an email client
that I downloaded from SourceForge.
And it didn't actually
come just like this,
but I did a little work to make
it as Mac-like as possible.
So, it comes up in Aqua, as you can see.
You have the screen menu bar up
here with all the menu shortcuts
as you might expect them to be.
And you have the application menu here.
And, you know,
I used our EAWT API to hook
in the about menu item,
the preferences menu item,
and the quit menu item.
But I don't want to,
we don't want to quit just yet.
And, you know, it's a Java application,
so it has these toolbar items for, say,
creating a new message.
That works just fine,
and it works fine from the menu,
but there's this thing on
Mac OS X called the dock,
and wouldn't it be great
if Java developers could
do something with the dock?
So I wrote a very simple JNI library
to add menu items into the dock.
So I go up here, select a new message,
and it hooks right into the
Java action as expected.
Really not very hard.
It was about five lines of code,
and if I'm in a good mood,
I'll release it to you guys.
So the other thing I did was
this app originally shipped
with its own address book.
It makes you enter all
your old addresses,
all your email addresses,
all your friends,
and everything like that,
and that's kind of useless.
So I figured I'd just write a
couple more lines of code with
the E-A-W-T Cocoa component,
and here we have an address
book people picker view,
which is part of the
Cocoa API to address book.
And so this is a J frame with
a people picker view inside it,
and it's tied into our app,
and it's not redrawing.
Let's try that again.
So we bring up the People Picker view,
and here are all our people.
And let me send an email to myself.
So I double-click this
from the address book,
and this is actually receiving an
event in Cocoa and then calling
back up through JNI to the
Java code with an email address,
which I then put into the email message.
Now, this is where the demo falls apart,
because I haven't paid
Fastmail this month,
and they're not letting me use SMTP.
So let's pretend I sent the message.
Or better yet,
I'll send one from my Yahoo account.
And there are plenty of
other things the dock can do.
You can set the dock icon and, you know,
among other things,
you can also bounce the dock.
So wouldn't it be great if we
could get user alerts just like
the regular mail application?
And there we go.
It's bouncing the dock
when I have a new email.
And it's already read.
That's about all I got to say.
This doesn't look exactly like
the Apple Mail application.
I wouldn't necessarily call
it a best-of-breed Mac app.
But this is what the application
looked like when I downloaded
it from SourceForge.
So we did pretty good.
And if you're interested in
seeing how I did all this stuff,
we'll be talking about it on Thursday,
and you get through it in an hour.
I'll take it back to Scott.
So one of the things Matt didn't say
is that he really didn't spend much
time trying to clean up that app.
It's actually a really ugly app, I think,
when you look at the images and things.
So the things that we're asking
people to do are things like
don't design your graphics to
necessarily match a specific OS.
And they had little tiny graphics
that look really bad compared to our
photorealistic stuff on Mac OS X.
So those are the kinds of cross-platform
things you have to pay attention to.
So now let's get on to performance.
We've been concentrating on performance.
Compatibility has been
our number one goal.
Performance has been our number two goal,
because if your applications don't run,
it doesn't matter how fast they run.
So let's look at performance.
So G5.
G5 is our big thing that
we announced last year,
and we've been working really hard
to make the G5 Java implementation
as fast as possible.
So what we've done for you—and
we announced some of this before,
but I just want to clarify—is
that G5 instructions are
automatically put in place for you.
So what this means is your code
that you've already compiled,
your Java code,
doesn't need to be recompiled for the G5.
It automatically—our bytecode compiler
automatically does that for you.
So if you have things that
are using longs and doubles,
we automatically are going to
use that and convert it into
full native 64-bit operations.
This means that if you used to have
four instructions to do an add,
now it's only two.
So it'll be a lot faster on the G5.
There also are G5-specific optimizations
that are just in the system itself.
We know things like how fast the
bus is and other stuff like that.
And the key—I'm just going to
say it again—is you don't need to
recompile to get these advantages.
So your JAR file or your double-clickable
application will just be faster.
So to show you a little bit about this,
we want to show you the
Cymark Composite Index.
And this is a benchmark for
scientific applications.
It does a lot of math and things a
lot of times with longs and doubles.
And
So we want to compare a
G4 dual 1.25 GHz machine,
and we got 98 was our score.
And bigger is better on this.
I don't know exactly what 98 means,
but 98 was the score.
So now when we compare that
to a G5 dual 2.5 GHz machine,
it would be unfair because
it's 2.5 GHz compared to 1.25.
So what we did is we just sort of said,
hey, let's just double it because,
you know, 1.25 times 2 is 2.5.
So that should be pretty close.
And then we look at the G5,
we get 289 compared to 196.
So the important point here is
that it's nonlinear improvement.
That's really important because
what that means is it means the
new architecture of the G5 plus the
G5 instructions means that we're
getting an extra 47% just for free.
It's not just, hey, we're twice as fast,
we're going to be twice as good.
were more than twice as good.
So let's move on to talk about the GPUs.
We have a lot of powerful GPUs.
You've seen a lot of the ways
they can be used by things like
Core Image and some other utilities,
and we're going to be using these.
So first,
I want to show you a little demo.
And if I can go to demo two.
[Transcript missing]
So what you're seeing here
is a full implementation
of Quake 2 written in Java.
So this is all of Quake 2
taken from the open source.
Some guys out there ported
the whole thing to Java,
and it's using OpenGL for
all the rendering.
But as you can see, it's really smooth.
It's really good.
It uses the JavaX sound
APIs for all the sound.
It kind of reminds me of when
I used to play a lot of games
before working on the Java team.
And it's really good.
And really,
what I wanted to show you this
for is just as a teaser for
the graphic session on Friday.
This is a program called Jake 2.
I just turned the sound down,
so it's not bothering you.
But it's a program called Jake 2,
and they're going to be talking about
a lot more at that session about what
you can do with OpenGL and what you
can do with games on the Mac in Java,
which who would have thought
you'd be able to do that?
So let's go back to slides.
So we are talking about the GPU and
you just saw this game running on
the Mac and really the reason you can
do it is because all this rendering
that just is impossible to do in
software is working using Joggle.
It's also working because our
Java is now fast enough to
actually compute all the things,
all the physics that needs to be
computed is being done in real time.
So Joggle in case you don't know
it is an open source implementation
of bindings for OpenGL.
It's freely available through their
website and I don't know what that
last bullet point is but Java 3D is
also another way to use the GPU and
we've talked about it in depth but it's
also a high level way to get into scene
descriptions and doing sort of high
level scenes but if you're really writing
a game and you want to get into low
level stuff Joggle is the way to go and
there will be a lot of talk about this
in the Friday Java 2D and 3D session.
And, of course,
using the GPU is Quartz Extreme on Tiger.
This is the biggest way
we're using the GPU.
And what this means is
hardware-accelerated Quartz 2D.
So that means your applications
will just run faster.
We're going to be able to do millions
of lines in times that we could
only do hundreds of lines or tens.
I don't actually have
numbers in front of me.
But it's so much faster because all that
drawing that was happening on the CPU,
all that anti-aliasing that
was happening on the CPU is now
being pushed off to the GPU.
And it just happens
automatically for you.
So that's the best part of it.
You can try some of this out in Tiger,
but we're actually going to be
working closely with the Quartz
team to make sure that we don't
have any bottlenecks anymore.
Because if you can imagine,
we have all of our drawing code,
and the bottleneck before
was actually drawing the
squares and drawing the lines.
Now that's all gone.
Now we get to concentrate on everything
else that's in there and what might
be slow in our part of the code and
also for you in your part of the code.
Because if the drawing code goes away,
then it becomes your image
manipulation code or your layout
code or something like that.
The other key important
thing here is that software
rendering has gotten faster.
One of the things that the Quartz
team did is they implemented
this hardware acceleration,
and they did the exact same
thing that I was talking about.
They said, hey,
our hardware acceleration is really fast,
but our setup time takes forever.
What's going on there?
And when it was taking 10 seconds
to render something and it was only
one second for doing your setup,
and now it only takes a tenth
of a second for your rendering,
and it still takes a
second for your setup,
you're going to optimize that setup.
So everything is going to be a
little faster because of this.
So we also talked about
performance-tuned releases.
And what does this mean?
It means we're gonna be
optimizing each of these releases.
So we've talked about 142 Update One and
our multi-threaded drawing updates.
And this is a big performance
increase because before we were
having to wait for one thread.
We were gonna have to block
the main thread of your
application to be able to draw.
We don't have to do that anymore.
And what does that mean?
That means as your application
is doing something,
interacting with the Cocoa framework,
let's say resizing or
something like that,
we can keep drawing.
You can be drawing from another thread,
from a Java update thread.
So you can be repainting
while you're live resizing.
Before we had to wait
for some of those things.
And if you have multiple threads drawing,
they're not gonna be
contending with each other,
especially if they're
drawing to separate contexts.
So this is a huge performance upgrade.
You also can get
intelligent display updates.
And what this means is this is
what's called in the graphics,
in the graphics world as flushing
or sinking to the screen.
So people over flush.
What happens is you
over sync to the screen.
You're trying to push frames up to
the screen at 300 frames a second,
400 frames a second.
And that's a waste because your
screen is refreshing on an LCD screen,
60 frames a second,
on a high end monitor,
maybe a hundred frames a second.
There's no need to actually
push that data up to the screen.
So we've optimized this so that you
aren't doing all those extra data pushes.
So you're only doing data
pushing when you need to.
So if you're over pushing,
it's only gonna do it when it has to.
And this is the same implementation
that we've actually received this
reference implementation from Sun.
So we're not playing any tricks here.
We're actually doing the correct thing.
'Cause some people think, oh,
you guys are flushing.
Is that a trick?
No, it's not a trick.
It's the way you're
supposed to do things.
So 1.4.2 update 1,
these are just some benchmarks
that I grabbed from the team,
and these are just some
benchmarks we use internally,
and we're getting as much as 50%
improvement on just standard benchmarks.
And this doesn't just measure our
graphics performance like you saw before.
This is system-wide performance
on some of these things.
Swingmark Aqua is the second one there,
and that actually involves opening
lots of windows and things that
graphics really doesn't affect.
So there's a lot of things
that we've sped up in general.
And these are great numbers to see.
And then the other performance
tune release is Tiger.
So we've talked a little bit about Tiger.
One of the big things in Tiger is
that we have new Tiger APIs to
use for things like the whole
tech system is being redone for
performance underneath the covers,
and we're going to do that for you.
So we're going to take care of
using the new tech system for you.
Like I said before,
Quartz Extreme lets us
discover new bottlenecks,
so we'll be able to find out what really
is slow beyond the graphics drawing.
And there's going to be
lots more coming in Tiger.
We have a while to work on
polishing our Tiger release,
and so we're just going to be putting
a lot more performance things into it.
So one other thing I wanted to talk
about—and Steve covered a little
bit of this this morning in his
keynote—is that we have more developer
tools than ever before on Mac OS X.
And this is just a sample of
some of the tools we have.
And there's a lot of people
who are going to be here at the
conference to talk about this,
and I wanted to highlight
a couple of them.
Eclipse 3.0—how many
people here use Eclipse?
Okay, great.
So I really strongly am encouraging
you to go to the Eclipse session.
There are going to be a couple of the
key people who work on the Eclipse
project there talking about it.
It's not just an introduction.
They'll be talking a
little more in depth.
So it's Tuesday at 2 p.m.
They're going to be
here to talk about it.
And I know a lot of people love this
whole—love the whole platform of Eclipse,
so I definitely encourage
you to check it out.
Check out their IDE and their whole SWT.
Sun also announced today
that Java Studio Creator is
available for Mac OS X.
How many saw James Gosling
demo it earlier?
So he demoed it in the
enterprise State of the Union.
And it's a great IDE.
It's based off of NetBeans.
It lets you deploy J2EE applications
and all these different things.
So it's a great tool,
and they're doing a whole session on it.
It's Tuesday at 10:30,
so I strongly encourage you
to go check out that session,
too.
And Oracle.
Oracle released JDeveloper 10G.
They're going to be fully supporting it.
They have a developer preview
available this summer.
Their final release is
going to be in the fall.
This is a big deal to have Oracle 10G on
our platform so that you can actually
use this for developing applications.
And finally,
I'd like to bring up Axel from Borland
to tell you a little bit about Borland's
announcements that happened this morning.
Hi, everyone.
Well, we're going to have to do
something about that list.
The JBuilder, you know,
we kind of got to notch it up to the top,
right?
Okay,
so how many people here use JBuilder?
Okay, so we have quite a few hands.
Well, I've got some great news today,
because what Borland just announced is
that we're going to be supporting the
Mac platform with our Optimize It suite,
and that includes a
full profiler for Java,
which allows you to do memory profiling,
CPU profiling.
And if you're familiar
with Optimize It out here,
well, it's really the industry's
best profiling tool for Java.
And in addition, of course,
we also have a thread
debugger and code coverage.
If you do a lot of unit testing,
you'll find code coverage
is quite handy as well.
So we're pretty excited about this.
There's a long standing
history for us with Apple.
We started supporting Apple.
We started supporting
Apple with JBuilder 6.
And then when we got Optimize It,
it got a little bit more difficult,
because Optimize It actually needs to
sync its claws into actually native
code in order to do the profiling.
But that's no longer
going to be a problem,
and we're pretty excited about this,
because OS X is just a great platform.
I still remember going to one of my
first usability sessions at Borland,
and the engineer,
I just looked at our ID, and I go, wow,
this is incredible.
Absolutely fantastic.
Couldn't believe it.
And I thought, wow,
I've got to get the latest
build and put it on my laptop.
And sure enough, I put it on my laptop,
and it doesn't look anything like it.
It says, what the heck happened here?
Well, the developer was using the
Mac OS X for the usability review.
So you can imagine,
we got quite a bit of fans at Borland.
So I hope you all take an opportunity to
take a look at what Borland has to offer.
With that, I'm also going to add,
what's not on the slides today is
the fact that JBuilder 11 will be
fully supported on the Mac platform,
whether you get JBuilder Foundation,
JBuilder Developer, or Enterprise.
It'll be easy to install, full installer,
and full support for Mac OS X.
We have JBoss support in
the Enterprise Edition.
I know you mentioned JBoss.
It's something that you
guys deliver as well.
So this should be a
pretty useful ID for you.
I do hope you guys all get it.
it a shot.
Thank you very much.
Thanks a lot.
So there's a lot of IDEs for you to use.
I didn't mention all of them.
I know a lot of people use Jetbrain's
IDEA and people who are using
Borland for JBuilder and Optimize it,
which it was one of the exciting things
when we worked on our 1.4.2 update
1 was I just installed my version of
Optimize and a bunch of features that
were broken earlier just started working.
And I was really excited that
this is a legacy application
because it's built on top of IFC,
but that's the style of that
application and it just worked
fine with our new update.
So it's really exciting.
So with that, I'd like to wrap up and I'd
like to bring up Alan Samuel,
our Java evangelist.
So I'm going to tell you guys a
little bit about sort of our year
in review and sort of what I've done
from a Java evangelism perspective.
So I think it was last summer,
James Gosling and I were
having lunch one day,
and I sort of said, how do I get at,
how do I talk to more
Java developers than I currently do?
And he started telling us about
these things called Sun Tech Days,
and it's sort of this sort of roving
outreach program that Sun does,
and it's not just Java,
but it was something that Apple could
actually sponsor and become a part of.
And so I'd say for, I don't know,
it's been over a year that we've
actually been out on the road.
Matt and Ted,
two of our Java engineers and myself,
traveled around the world.
Some of you may have already actually
seen us in some of the other venues.
These are just some of
the locations we went to.
We started right in Microsoft's backyard,
which I thought was a great
location to start our event.
We went right to Seattle,
and the amazing thing was we had
this huge Java community there.
Some of you may be from Seattle.
A huge number of people came
and attended our session.
We had one session there and spent a lot
of time talking with us in the booth.
So it was great to know that there
are that many Java developers there.
We spent some time in the U.K.
All of these events,
we actually went out.
I mean, a lot of you that are here today.
Well, let me ask you this.
How many of you in the audience,
is this your first time here?
All right, let me ask you this.
Have any of you seen myself or
any of the other Java engineers
speak at any of the SunTech days?
All right, a couple.
All right, that's excellent.
So I guess it was working.
Really, the whole idea on this was just
to go out and reach out more to
the Java community and get those
people interested in developing and
deploying those applications and
those solutions on the platform.
So I think it's worked.
We'll talk about a
couple other locations.
Here's a great picture of Ted and
I actually in Sao Paulo at Red ATV.
Now, actually, I've seen some of our
Brazilian counterparts
who work for us there.
This is an excellent success
story sort of for Apple,
Java, QuickTime.
This is a Brazilian television
station that runs their entire studio,
including all of their ad placement,
using a QuickTime for Java-based system.
So that one of the things that I saw,
you can actually,
as a commercial provider,
let's say I've got a product
that I'm advertising,
I can watch the real-time statistics
of how many people are tuning into
my show and actually insert in
the middle of that television show
with a QuickTime for Java system.
So I can sit there in
the audience and go,
hey, guess what?
I've got a lot of people watching.
Let's put the commercial there.
I couldn't believe this.
This entire television station in
Brazil was run using Apple products,
using QuickTime for Java.
I mean, these guys go so far as I believe
they've even got chest-mounted laptops.
They were running like iMacs with
DV cameras that went and connected back
to like a mobile television studio.
And then microwaved it back.
Nothing was even going to tape.
They were that advanced.
And here we were in Brazil.
Our biggest event by far was China.
And I guess I should have expected this,
but all of you that are here
today are all registered
Apple Developer Connection members,
right?
We had 500 Java developers like yourself
sign up in one day in our booth.
It was absolutely incredible.
So I think the thing is you've seen a
lot of the stuff that's skyrocketing.
And I think the thing is you've seen a
And I want to make one more statement
about that because it is going away.
We want to give you all
of these new features,
all this new work that the
Java engineering team has done is
all going to be on 1.4 and 1.5.
And that's how you're going to get all
those advantages that you've seen today.
So please let us know if there are
things that are holding you over
from making that conversion to 1.4.
That's really important for us.
So I think with that,
I'm going to go ahead and wrap it up.
Before we leave, I think we've got a
slideshow with some more.
3D images.
Is that already set to go on demo?
Demo 2, I think it is.
So if you guys want to.
I got to put mine back on too.
Check this out.
Well, that's pretty cool.
Well again,
I wanna thank everybody for coming,
and we appreciate your time.
- Too much of anything
is not good for you,
baby.
But I don't know about that.
There's many times when we've loved,
and we've shared love, and made love,
and made love, and made love,
and made love, and made love.